welcome to topcast where we're back for
a second episode devoted to probability
and the fourth episode of my series on
rationality by Professor Stephen Pinker
in the last episode of topcast I
mentioned that I now have a newsletter
that's episode 112 I guess it will
appear in feeds you can sign up to my
newsletter on sub stack so it should be
somewhere there in YouTube and what I'm
intending on using that sub stack
newsletter for because it will contain
audio it's just a place to have some
musings about things that I don't think
really might fit with the theme of the
usual podcasts and so it might be
updates on what's coming up on the
podcast or just Reflections on things
that might be more timely here on the
podcast I like to deal with Timeless
matters things that can be applied no
matter when and where you happen to pick
up this podcast but in the last main
episode of topcast that'll be episode
111 I turn to explaining what
probability is and how it's used and
misused by providing at the heart of the
episode an explanation in my words of
our best understanding of reality as it
is given what we know about the laws of
physics following David's talk on all of
that now that episode generated quite a
bit of a response which I kind of
expected and so I tweeted a couple of
things alluding to probability and that
also generated a lot of responses
probability it seems like
interpretations of quantum theory like
climate change politics morality
religion UFO sightings educating
children and probability to the list of
third rail topics that for some people
become very emotional which kind of
makes things fun it is one of those
things people were taught in school
probability it's right there in the
Mathematics Curriculum in most
jurisdictions that I'm aware of kids
learn it and some learn it reasonably
well some go on to specialize in fields
which touch on probability some are paid
for their forecasting or couched into
terms of probability so a lot rests on
what is said about probability again
like religion or morality or politics
things that seem to be largely a matter
of opinion probability is part of our
language and so people cannot see why a
statement like it will probably rain
today when taken super seriously
literally as a description of reality it
will probably rain today that statement
it's actually meaningless in the case of
that very example it will probably rain
today by the time the day is over you'll
know whether it rained or not you will
not observe that it had probably rained
if you observed anything relevant at all
either it rained or it did not rain it
did not probably rain it never probably
rains but in any case it's there in our
language and people speak English and
other languages and if you're using the
word probably and Associated words like
likely or almost certain and so on you
know what they mean so how dare anyone
come along and suggest that you're
speaking little nonsense
well there's no perfectly precise
language so we're not saying you can't
use the words and that one's use of
language is nonsense only that
considering probability to be a true
explanation of what happens in physical
reality is just not true but being there
in the language it's there in our minds
in a deep way there is some really
interesting ways in which it seems like
the meme itself makes strides at
entringing itself into our thinking and
our culture of course it's kind of silly
to say the meme kind of has this desire
the meme of course the idea has no will
of its own but it really does get into
people's heads so to speak so they'll
defend it like the religious aren't
content rather often to Simply hear one
out about their lack of religious belief
they want to convince you they want to
convert you they want to show how you're
wrong not all religious people are like
this some are but then so are some
atheists they need you to agree so too
with probability since last episode I've
been asked online and offline in Zoom
calls and Cafe conversations about
genuine Randomness versus things that
obey the probability calculus what we
said last time was that nothing in
reality strictly obeyed the probability
calculus truly Fair coins for example
their idealizations and you'd need a
truly Fair coin and a truly Fair Way of
tossing a truly Fair coin and so on for
it to obey the probability calculus
strictly but if we take the idealization
seriously for a moment as a mathematical
object obeying imaginary laws of physics
in abstract space then we can use the
probability calculus to model such an
object like a game we can simulate all
of this using a computer it's just
important to keep in mind that virtual
ideal coins and dice and so on do not
exist in our universe in our universe
they're made of atoms that obey quantum
theory not probability Theory and those
things are not identical quantum theory
and probability
but for now we can imagine coins in the
let's say the Star Wars Universe in the
Star Wars Universe maybe there's
imaginary coins there coins that exist
in the Star Wars universe that do obey
the probability calculus like the Star
Wars Universe has psychic forces magic
and faster than light travel and all
sorts of other non-relativistic effects
and violations of conservation laws so
let them have Fair coins as well in that
case in that Universe the coin when it's
flipped really does land 50 heads and 50
Tails half times heads half tons of
Tails and whether that means every
second coin tosses ahead or it means
that in the long run of like 100 you'd
get exactly 50 heads and 50 Tails but
maybe you wouldn't know the precise
order until you get down to the last few
throws this all gets very complicated I
don't know I'm not an expert in Star
Wars physics or how laws of physics that
allow for perfectly Fair coins would
work precisely but whatever in such a
universe I assert that what we would
have there would fit the meaning of the
word stochastic which is a kind of
Randomness so inherent in the universe
there Star Wars the universe far far
away our process is perfectly well
captured by the probability calculus
because whatever the deeper fundamental
laws of physics are they are allowing
for perfectly Fair coins and fair tosses
and so on a process captured by the
probability calculus is stochastic by
definition they mutually Define one
another it's a form of Randomness but
I've argued it's not complete Randomness
ask a child what complete Randomness
would be if they were to flip a coin my
idea of complete and utter Randomness
and to be honest this is not mine this
is what we might call Common Sense
Randomness it assumes no further axioms
genuine Randomness is something that
won't even obey the probability calculus
so simply because it obeys some law the
stochastic law well it's not utterly
random utter Randomness my example was a
coin that when flipped really did do
something random it wasn't just
unpredictable whether it landed heads or
tails but it was unpredictable whether
it landed at all perhaps it violated
conservation of energy and became a 10
ton lump of metal and violated the
prohibition on the spontaneous
generation of knowledge and assembled
itself into a perfectly engineered Great
Eagle able to fly and then violated
relativity and various other
conservation laws by accelerating to be
on the speed of light now that coin toss
truly is random and not even governed by
the probability calculus so in that case
we can kind of have two sorts of
Randomness I guess stochastic Randomness
and actual Randomness actual Randomness
is just random to get to stochastic
Randomness you need to add some
lawfulness Axiom to it namely you have
to add the constraint the system obey is
the probability calculus so the coin
cannot violate other laws of physics I
should add at this point the probability
calculus my mainstream probability
predicts the coin lands heads or tails
when you flip it but actual quantum
theory it predicts heads or tails plus
also the other non-zero possibilities of
it not landing at all but turning into a
butterfly and flying away now if you're
rolling your eyes right now I don't have
time to go into all the details here but
let's just say that quantum physics is
an explanation even of the small measure
of universes where the Absurd happens
however rare that happens to be one
should not expect this will ever happen
to you and for all intents and purposes
can be ignored in day-to-day life and
decision making but it cannot be ignored
by those who are committed very strictly
to realism rationality good explanations
and of course making progress consult
page 300 of the beginning of Infinity
for more on this exact point about coins
turning into butterflies or rather as
David explains there kettles of water
turning into bunnies and top hats and
then hopping away so this is an
important point I need to emphasize from
last episode before we proceed physical
reality is governed by the laws of
quantum theory among other laws applying
those laws to coin tosses in a very
hand-waving but nonetheless consistent
manner we can predict that close to 50
of the time we will get heads and close
to 50 Tails but it is inconsistent with
saying that either of those can be
predicted to be exactly fifty percent
because in the real world flipped coins
do not necessarily land heads or tails
they land heads or tails or they do
something else that's something else
they do is physical it is real it can
happen and so if we want an actual
rational conception of reality we need
to include that the coin May land on its
Edge neither head or tail it may also as
we say transform itself into something
else it does not matter how rarely but
it does mean that ultimately in the long
run as the frequentist wants the in the
limit approach so to speak to an
infinite number of coin tosses then we
will indeed have a column that is other
heads
tails and other and that will mean that
heads and tails when summed together
will always be less than a hundred
percent of the flips in the long run
according to Quantum Theory heads will
be less than 50 and Tails will be less
than fifty percent in the infinite
sequence governed by actual Quantum laws
of physics there is that third column
reducing both the heads and the Tails
because sometimes it's doing something
else so this episode is very much going
to draw on the last episode of topcast
number 111 and in other words based on
the work of David Deutsch there and
we'll be applying literal realism and
rationality to the next chapter of
pinker's book rationality now in
preparation for today's summary and
Reflections I was watching some of what
Professor Pinker has said during
interviews on the topic of probability
for example here on the screen is an
image of the lecturer I was watching
anyway and I'll put the link in the
description anyways there Pinker makes
some claims I found rather startling and
light off well my close reading of his
book one such claim there is at the um
well it's the 368 second Mark and he
says there that formal logic is quote
and that's another reason why logic in
the formal sense is often
um kind of useless in for everyday
reasoning so game is an example and
vegetable now of course there are
domains of thinking in which we do have
to stipulate rules and
ascertain whether a fuzzy category fits
the the definition now you see I agree
with that so what's my problem well my
problem is that he has a book on
rationality where he devotes an entire
chapter basically to explaining aspects
of it formal logic rules of inference
truth tables and so on even says on page
87 and let me quote he says quote the
habit of formal reconstruction even if
carried out pathway can often expose
fallacious inferences and unstated
premises which would otherwise lie
hidden in any argument and is well worth
cultivating
end quote so formal reconstruction which
is absolutely a part of formal logic
turning an argument into formal logic is
what it is he says it's well worth
cultivating now in my episode of topcast
where I discussed that exact issue the
issue of formal reconstruction I
basically said the exact opposite I've
never had occasion to use it for more
reconstruction I don't know anyone who
ever has done it for more reconstruction
and I doubt it could be done properly
anyways because language is ambiguous in
ways logical propositions are not and so
on and so forth so it's hard to know
what position Professor Pinker really
expects us to embrace to inform our
worldview is it the working notion that
formal logic all the way to formal
logical reconstruction is useful and
well worth cultivating or should we live
by the idea that formal logic is pretty
useless for day-to-day reasoning my
personal view again is the second formal
logic is pretty useless for day-to-day
reasoning but this is only to say that
well so is geometry at a lot of the time
and so as is quantum theory and so is
specific knowledge of the chronology and
causes of World War II however in all
cases there there is useful information
and sometimes some of that will come to
bear on your day-to-day reasoning and
the thing here is that in those cases
it's rather about how we can go about
bringing it to bear that knowledge in
terms of criticisms or refutations of
the other ideas we have it all depends
on what the problem situation is at the
time people go through their life
encountering and trying to solve
problems and there will come a time now
and again a problem they will find not
often but now and again for which formal
logic might just help a knowledge of
formal logic that is
but just because now and again it
happens doesn't mean that you should
devote hours and hours and hours devoted
to figuring out how to understand formal
logic better because it's the rare
exception to the rule that it will ever
be applicable in your day-to-day life
unless you're a logician unless you have
fun solving formal logic problems okay
that's enough of an introduction let's
get into some reading and let's begin at
the beginning of chapter four titled
probability and Randomness and Pinker
begins with a quote the quote is from
Samuel Johnson and says quote a thousand
stories which the ignorant tell and
believe die away at once when the
Communist takes them in his gripe end
quote and we're going to pick it up
right at the beginning of the book then
after that quote and I'm going to be
nitpicky here just for the first couple
of paragraphs because Pinker begins with
quote though Albert Einstein never said
most of the things he supposedly said he
did say in several variations I shall
never believe that God God placed dice
with the world end quote and he was
absolutely right Einstein was absolutely
right
God does not play dice with the universe
quantum theory is no theory of
randomness of the the metaphorical dice
rolling in the universe playing dice of
the universe it's not probabilistic at
all Einstein had he known it would have
embraced we would think we shouldn't
speak for him but if someone is
committed to determinism then they would
Embrace this idea of unitary quantum
theory as I'm more often calling it now
in other words the Multiverse let's keep
going so pinka continues to write quote
whether or not he was right about the
subatomic world the world we live in
certainly looks like a game of dice with
unpredictability at every scale end
quote okay I've got to just got to pick
up Pinker on that as well so he's saying
that the Universe looks unpredictable
however what do we say here that's a
form of empiricism stars look cold stars
look closer than they are and stars look
dim of course anyone who argues for the
reality of probability on the basis that
the world looks like a game of dice is
just invoking empiricism invoking
empiricism so that's not a very good
argument let's keep going pinga goes on
to right the race is not always to the
Swift nor the battle to the strong nor
the bread to the wise nor favor to those
of skill but time and chance happen to
them all an essential part of
rationality is dealing with Randomness
in our lives and uncertainty in our
knowledge end quote yes so absolutely I
can agree with this we need to be able
to deal with uncertainty in our lives
but uncertainty is not the same as
Randomness we're not dealing with
Randomness we're dealing with subjective
unpredictability and seem like last my
episode 111 about probability for that
subjective under subjective
unpredictability is you don't know
personally what's going to happen in the
future that's not to say that it's
entirely random okay it's governed by
the laws of physics these are different
things uncertainty likewise is just the
inability for you to be rationally
absolutely dogmatically sure that some
particular thing that you happen to know
is the once and for all final truth okay
the next section is titled what is your
Randomness where does it come from and
I'm not going to read through all of
this part here goes through discussing a
a Dilbert cartoon and then I won't I
can't put it up I think it's copyrighted
but basically in the first panel you've
got do what being shown around hell I
think by a demon and the the demon is
pointing over into One Direction and
saying over here we have our random
number the generator and the random
number generator is a demon sitting
there just spouting the words nine nine
nine nine so just saying 999 over again
Dilbert is saying are you sure that's
random and the demon showing him around
Hills is saying that's the problem with
Randomness you can never be sure so
quite right too what Pinker says on this
is quote this answer captures the second
sense of Randomness and anarchic
unpredictable generating process the
troll the demon is correct that a random
process can generate a seemingly
non-random pattern at least for a while
for six digits worth of output in this
case after all if there's no Rhyme or
Reason to the generator what's to stop
it from producing six nines or any other
non-random pattern at least occasionally
end quote so we should just Linger on
that because we're doing a close reading
of the book so let's really focus on
this because I think it's quite right as
I said in my introduction into this
Randomness literal physical Randomness
would mean that something is happening
for no Rhyme or Reason as Pinker says
right there okay so I'm just lingering
on that I think that that's quite right
actual Randomness are events that happen
for no Rhyme or Reason no cause nothing
prior nothing determines it it just
happens there's no reason and as a
consequence we describe that situation
as it's random and I think this is what
people mean like kids today use the word
oh that's so random and I think that you
know it means that that's a crazy thing
or whatever but you know pushed to
explain what you mean by random it's a
thing that happens for no reason if
there's a reason for it it's not really
random you would appeal to the reason
for saying why that particular thing
happened and so if we start to say well
these random things for which we have a
reason for which they happen then we
need a new word a new word for those
events that in theory in a fictional
world would happen for literally no
reason okay so I'm getting hung up on
this so we kind of have two senses of
random is all I'm saying there I'm
skipping apart and I'll pick it up where
Pinker says after he talks more about
Randomness quote all this raises the
question of What kinds of physical
mechanism can Generate random events
Einstein notwithstanding most physicists
believe there is irreducible Randomness
in the subatomic realm of quantum
mechanics like the decay of an atomic
nucleus or the emission of a photon when
an electron jumps from one energy state
to another end quote okay so my issue
here is there's a few logical fallacies
in what I just read so he says Einstein
notwithstanding so it's kind of implying
that Einstein is wrong but that's just a
mere assertion we're not told why he's
also appealing to the authority of
physicists because they're physicists
never mind physics itself but if
physicists are saying that a certain
thing is the case then it's the case but
also he's appealing to the majority okay
so appealing to the majority of
physicists so I think these are a
logical fallacies as we like to say this
is not not randomness of the previous
kind anyway he's kind of having a bet
both ways I'll come back to that it's
either the no Rhyme or Reason thing or
it's been caused by physical laws well
which is it okay if they're both random
well then we're conflating two things
things caused by laws or physics and
things that happen for no Rhyme or
Reason they can't both be random or if
they can well then we've got two quite
separate meanings of Random so just to
linger on that like Pinker goes on okay
quote he says it's possible for this
Quantum uncertainty to be Amplified to
scales that impinge on our lives when I
was a research assistant in an animal
behavior lab the refrigerator-sized
micro computers of the day were too slow
to Generate random looking numbers in
real time and my supervisor had invented
a gadget with a capsule filled with a
radioactive isotope and a teensy-weensy
geiger counter that detected the
intermittent particle spray and trip to
switch that fed a pigeon and quotes and
so what I would say on that is this is
subjective unpredictability as I say
it's not Randomness the former
subjective unpredictability is a
consequence of the laws of quantum
mechanics it's determined by them but
the latter okay this Randomness as
Pinker himself only just admitted
happens for no reason it certainly
cannot be determined by the laws of
physics that would be the opposite
wouldn't it Pinker himself therefore is
not clear on what Randomness is because
he's switching without concern between
things caused or in other words things
determined by physical laws and the
opposite of that claim things that
happen for no Rhyme or Reason now in
day-to-day life maybe this is not so
much a problem to conflate these things
but in a book on rationality one would
presume one is striving for consistency
in fact a a big deal that um or Pinker
makes a big deal of that in various
places throughout the book so skipping
just a little bit um and pink goes on to
say how could Randomness arise in a
world of billiard balls obeying Newton's
equations as the 1970s poster Proclaim
satirizing Billboards about the speed
limit gravity it isn't just a good idea
it's the law in theory couldn't the
demon imagined by Pierre Simon LaPlace
in 1814 who knew the position and
momentum of every particle in the
universe plug them into equations for
the laws of physics and predict the
future perfectly in reality there there
are two ways in which a law governed
world can generate events that for all
intents and purposes are random end
quote for all intents and purposes are
random says Professor pinkel well now it
seems to me we're switching to a third
kind of Randomness almost we can't seem
to get it straight first random meant in
the book on the in the chapter on
probability and Randomness random meant
for no Rhyme or Reason then random meant
something that was actually literally
caused by physical events determined by
the decay of atoms themselves governed
by the laws of physics and here now well
here we have a Randomness That Is Random
for all intents and purposes so it's a
Third Kind like is it random or not all
for all intents and purposes it is what
does that mean not random right
I don't know I'm confused Pinker goes on
I'm skipping some more and I'll pick it
up where he writes the other way in
which a deterministic system can appear
to be random from a human vantage point
also has a familiar name the coin flip
the fate of a tossed coin is not
literally random a skilled magician can
flick one just so to get a head or a
tail on demand but when an outcome
depends on a large number of tiny causes
that are impractical to keep track of
like the Angles and forces that launched
the penny and the wind currents
buffeting it in mid-air it might as well
be random end quote
it might as well be random well the fact
is it isn't it isn't so in a book on
rationality when we go to the section on
Randomness wouldn't the rational thing
be to take seriously reality so
shouldn't we be saying something like
nothing is actually random but some
things seem to an observer to be random
and let's explain why that would be
informative that would help form a
rational worldview because we'd be
grounded back in reality we could
consult physics and Science and be
consistent in our world view rather than
sometimes asserting the reality of
Randomness or sometimes it's unreality
but acting as if it's real might as well
be random which is what he's saying
might as well be random is not random
and the difference matters very much
because your subjective ignorance which
is the cause of your inability to
predict could make a difference to what
you think is possible or not and that's
the real right if the world contained
literal Randomness or even might as well
be Randomness then literally anything
follows or it might as well be that
literally anything follows but we do not
live in a world of Randomness or might
as well be Randomness we live in a world
of unpredictability but and big butt
here I like big butts and I cannot lie
the big butt here is that our world is
governed by laws of physics that rule
out a vast number of things not
everything is possible unlike in a world
of genuine Randomness where anything
could follow or would follow there would
be no laws and hence nothing could be
ruled out the next section is titled
what does probability mean and so we're
going to read through parts of this pink
writes quote when the TV meteorologist
says there's a 30 chance of rain in the
area tomorrow what does she mean most
people are foggy about the answer some
think it means it will rain in 30 of the
area others think it will rain 30 of the
time a few think it means that thirty
percent of meteorologists think it will
rain and some think it means it will
rain somewhere in the area on 30 of the
days in which a prediction like that is
made the last of these is in fact
closest to what the meteorologist had in
mind end quote okay so I'm going to
reflect on that now this this paragraph
comes from a paper there's a note at the
end of that paragraph I went to the note
I went to the reference that is in the
note and it's a psychological study when
I say psychological study it is what one
would expect from a psychological study
it is people have been surveyed random
people have been surveyed on the street
supposedly we're told they're random
people whatever a random person is
now this idea that there's a 30 chance
of rain and that some people think it
will mean it will rain in 30 of the area
really I can't imagine anyone would
think that others think it will rain 30
of the time really
um and if you think it will mean that 30
of meteorologists think Will Rain I
don't know if any of those are true but
according to the scientific study that
is linked to and that scientific study
I'll link to that I'll link to that in
the the description to this the title of
the sub the the title of that paper
published in 2005 easy to find through
Googling is quote a 30 chance of rain
tomorrow how does the public understand
probabilistic weather forecasts end
quote so the methodology used in this
study was to survey people what they
thought the statement meant and the
survey was conducted in Amsterdam Athens
Berlin Milan and New York and the
authors of the study claim that only in
New York did a majority give the correct
answer and they say the correct answer
is when the weather conditions are like
today in three out of ten cases there
will be at least a trace of rain the
next day yes well that's what the study
says is close to what or what is what
meteorologists mean
I'm not sure actually that quite
captures it and their methodology like I
say was to survey people with open-ended
questions as well as multiple choice
answers so if you've got multiple choice
answers you're kind of leading the
survey participant aren't you so look
again I could nitpick on this all day
let's not psychology studies like this
are extremely dubious poorly controlled
and well just poor science bad
explanations I can still think very few
people actually think those false
options are true despite what the paper
says because of how the survey was
conducted I can agree I can agree most
people are foggy about the actual answer
but then I think the author of the paper
End of This Book is foggy about the
answer too and we'd have to ask specific
meteorologists to find out what they
really think but in meteorology today
modern meteorology it's reasonably well
known that what is happening especially
these days is that modeling is done
computer modeling by supercomputers
they're simulating what's going to
happen and when the modeling is done if
30 of the models with subtly different
initial conditions predict rain anywhere
in the area that's why they say there's
a 30 chance of rain because thirty
percent of the models they run of the
simulations they run produce rain and
here's the thing even if you use the
same model the issue is that you can
only measure the relevant variables
current temperature pressure wind speed
humidity and so on to some Precision
let's say you can measure it to the
first decimal place well the problem is
that variations in the second decimal
place that you can't measure and you
don't have access to with your measuring
instruments could make all the
difference so those models are getting
better over time but they're still prone
to errors and this is why we have this
uncertainty these dynamical systems are
excruciatingly subject to those initial
conditions and so on and because it's a
highly complex system and these days
even human beings have some effect on
the weather so what we have is a system
that is only partially understood and so
we get sometimes reasonably good
predictions looking out the window is
still a good idea though by the way all
this weather talk reminds me of an
example I'm sure I've used this before
in topcast when it comes to bayesianism
which we're going to come to in the next
chapter if the person discussing the
weather on the news reports a 30 chance
of rain and at six a.m in the morning
you're about to walk out the door you
flicked on the television and they say
30 chance of rain today do you grab your
umbrella on the way out or not well if
your umbrella is large cumbersome that's
a golf type umbrella and you are taking
a crowded train this decision matters to
you so do you take the umbrella or not
30 chance of rain well here's the thing
it's a silly question
how about you look out the window if you
just look out the window as the sun
rises at 6am and see a lovely pink
gradually clearing to Blue Sky that's
one thing but if you see storm clouds
and torrential rain on the street then
your 30 guest goes out the window
entirely it's raining right now with 100
chance and you take your umbrella now on
the other hand if it is perfectly blue
skies you might not you especially don't
take it if on looking out the window you
see the clear sky and remember silly you
when you turned on the television just
now it picked up from where you left off
last night when you're watching a weak
old interview with the Ukrainian
president and at the end of that
interview they cut to the weather and so
the weather report you were watching
wasn't for today at all it was the last
week but because you were in a hurry you
didn't notice I forget the umbrella then
and in all of that discussion notice I
never needed to talk about Bayes
conditional probabilities and so on I
just don't think I'm going through what
is called Bayesian reasoning as such but
some people will call it that I just
call it plain old reasoning I'm guessing
and going with my best guess and I'm
refuting guesses along the way when I
get evidence that refutes the guess in
favor of another better guess and
besides I wasn't calculating any
probability and this is the whole issue
I sometimes have with so-called
bayesians if you're a Bayesian Reasoner
where are your probabilities where are
your prize where are these numbers I
guess we'll have to come back to that
and we will come back to umbrellas and
rainy days in sections on Bays to come
in this book but anyways that 30 rain it
really means that the model or models
say that 30 of the time when they're run
given some set of conditions they end up
producing rain okay I'm skipping a
substantial bit where pinka talks about
how probability what his probability is
aren't he's trying to answer that
question it could be the classical
definition of probability he talks about
so in other words this is what I call
the a priori idea that you know if a
dice has six sides then each each side
when you roll it has a one in six chance
of coming up now of course that assumes
a perfectly Fair dice which assumes
perfect construction of the dice no bias
towards any side and no bias in the
throwing of it and laws of physics that
don't possibly bias it and introduce
more unpredictability that I spoke about
last time like what if it lands on an
edge or the vanishingly small chance it
shatters when you're old or does
something more bizarre still those
things are still physics they're part of
reality and the probability calculus has
nothing whatsoever to say about them so
in terms of explaining reality again it
fails Pinker goes through the
subjectivist interpretation talks about
how that's all about quantifying your
belief I agree that that's what it's
supposed to be so probability is just
about how confident you are in things on
that particular view he mentions a few
other interpretations and of course gets
to the frequentest interpretation and
well let's read what he has to say about
this quote finally there is the
frequentest interpretation if you did
toss the dime many times say a thousand
and counted the outcomes you'd find that
the result was even in around 500 of the
tosses or half of them end quote so let
me let me just say that again because
I'm going to come back to this again and
again and it's just a function of well
to some extent as a function of being a
critical rationalist maybe there's
nitpickiness I'm not always nitpicky but
in a book on rationality then you're
purporting to be perfectly rational I I
sort of have a high expectation of
consistency and so here what Pinker has
just said you've rolled a die a thousand
times you've counted the outcomes and
you find that the result was even in a
round
500 of the tosses so maybe 498 and what
Pinker then goes on to say is or half of
them hmm so I think you can guess what
I'm going to say
why is about
500 out of a thousand half why in a book
on rationality would we accept
498 out of a thousand as being equal to
a half and how far away from 500 do we
have to get before it's not equal to a
half
this is not a good standard for
rationality we're either equal to a half
or we're not equal to a half but this is
the way in which we can massage reality
so that it appears to obey the
probability calculus when we start to
just ignore facts of the matter if the
result was that exactly 500 of the
tosses all the time were even if it was
that if that really was the case then we
could say it was a half but it's not
it's not exactly equal to half it's only
approximately a half which is not a half
Pinker goes on to say that the
interpretations of probability are
normally aligned but they're not okay so
this is also an issue okay they're
approximately aligned sometimes he then
says in the case of a coin toss the
penny is symmetrical again no it's not
it's approximately symmetrical an ideal
coin rendered in a computer simulation
might be symmetrical and by symmetrical
I mean perfectly symmetrical which is
what is required for a perfectly Fair
coin number one among many things that's
right applied for a perfectly Fair coin
so that the probability calculus would
hold okay skipping quite a bit picking
it up where a Pinker writes quote people
also confuse probability in the
frequentis sense with propensity good
gigarenza who happens to be the guy that
wrote the paper about what people think
when the meteorologist says there's a 30
chance of rain anyway this guy recounts
a tour of an aerospace Factory in which
the guide told the visitors that it's
Ariane Rockets had a 99.6 percent
security Factor they were standing in
front of a poster depicting the 94
rockets and their histories eight of
which crashed or blew up when gigarenza
asked how a rocket with a 99.6 security
Factor could fail almost nine percent of
the time the guide explained that the
factor was calculated from the
reliabilities of the individual parts
and the failures were the result of
human error of course what we ultimately
care about is how often the rocket slips
The Surly Bonds of Earth or buys the
farm regard regardless of the causes so
the only probability that matters is the
overall frequency but the same
misunderstanding people sometimes wonder
why a popular candidate who's Miles
Ahead in the polls is given only a 60
chance of winning the election when
nothing but a last-minute shocker could
derail him the answer is that the
probability estimate takes into account
last minute Shockers the end quote my
reflection on this what I think about
all of that it's 99.6 security Factor
thing that the rocket has but in fact
nine percent of them are failing and you
know the the the the candidate who's
given a a particular chance of winning
an election who actually ends up going
on to lose it what this all means really
is that probability like its cousin or
its brother it's twin brother
statistics statistics probability that
can be used to mislead so not only isn't
it about anything physical probability
but as those examples there the Pinker
uses himself as they show it is used to
deceive rather often deliberately or at
least pull the wool over one's eyes I
think the lesson here is that when
someone expert or otherwise comes to you
with a probability claim be especially
critical turn your critical faculties
right up to maximum be on your guard are
they claiming to possess knowledge they
do not have well that's one thing are
they using so-called legitimate numbers
collected using reliable methods but
then passing that data through a
processing system that actually hides
what is far more clearly accurate when
putting plain language like was only
revealed in these situations upon the
questioning that politics one is a nice
case in point if Hillary Clinton had an
80 chance of winning well what are we
really saying and why aren't we saying
what we are really saying why are the
Elite pretending everyone knows what we
are really saying what we're really
saying what we're really saying is it
remains anyone's election and we have
simply no clue until the votes are
counted
so why are we saying that so-and-so has
an 80 chance of winning why is the media
invested in that kind of thing they
don't know they're pretending to know
the next section is titled probability
versus a valuability and I won't be
reading the entire thing I'll be reading
little Snippets here and there the first
one is quote people judge the
probability of events by the ease with
which instances come to mind a habit
versky and Kahneman called the
availability heuristic we use the
ranking from our brain search engine the
images anecdotes and mental videos it
coughs up as our best guess of the
probabilities end quote and what I'd say
about here what I'd say about that is in
other words what we know can cause us to
think things about what we know compared
to what we don't know which is a
statement of logic now I'm not going to
spend a huge amount of time on this
section in the chapter because it's
largely about people overestimating
certain dangers for example and
underestimating others because the
overestimated ones are the ones that are
seen in the media more often so yeah
that's common sense I find it not
particularly insightful doesn't everyone
know this in our world view you know
this popperian world view and this
optimistic David Deutsche world view
that I'm sometimes animated in trying to
convey to people why personally take
away from that a concern if I'm going to
be concerned about anything about
problems we don't yet know about the
unknown I agree that there is this issue
about people over egging so to speak
certain problems and the biggest problem
with that with the over rigging with
emphasizing certain problems as being
catastrophically huge and
all-encompassing and it should devote
almost all of our attention to the
problem with that is that it takes
resources away from Simply producing
more wealth and preparing the world for
the unknown for the next problem I
really think this is the thing we should
be focused on Pinker of course is more
concerned about known problems and how
people are ignorant to some problems
that are known to knowledgeable people
the elites and so on and he thinks that
the learned the Learned people know
things that delay person don't know and
the layperson should try harder to to
fix their ignorance on certain points
and I just think that we're all
infinitely ignorant and we better watch
out because while focusing on you know
what's beneath our feet the asteroid is
coming from behind us the metaphorical
asteroid so to speak and we need to turn
around we need to accumulate more and
more we need to generate more and more
wealth more and more knowledge that
takes resources so on and so forth a big
theme here at topcast but let's go on we
will move very swiftly through this
section I'm skipping a a vast amount of
it the majority and I'll pick it up
where Tinker speaks about nuclear power
and he writes quote nuclear power is the
safest form of energy Humanity has ever
used mining accidents hydroelectric Dam
failures natural gas explosions and oil
train crashes is or kill people
sometimes in large numbers and smoke
from burning coal kills them in enormous
numbers more than half a million per
year yet nuclear power has stalled for
decades in the United States and is
being pushed back in Europe often
replaced by dirty and dangerous coal in
large part the opposition is driven by
memories of three accidents Three Mile
Island in 1979 which killed no one
Fukushima and 2011 which killed one
worker years later the other deaths were
caused by the tsunami and from a
panicked evacuation and the Soviet
bungled Chernobyl in 1986 which killed
31 in the accident and perhaps several
thousand from cancer around the same
number killed by coal emissions every
day end quote yes so that's all worth
reflecting on now I would say the lesson
there is
just don't let things that the media has
a fixation on an obsession with or that
the environmentalists have an obsession
with and politicians and political
leaders who become fearful of don't let
all of that get in the way of progress
the lesson here I would think is to use
cheap energy so that we can generate
more wealth and more knowledge more
quickly so that we can come up with you
know fusion power for example to power
the knowledge economy we should do that
as efficiently and quickly as possible
because Fusion is a physical possibility
we know that we just don't know the
engineering of how to get there but once
we do get there this is all a moot point
it really is a glass of water out of the
ocean is going to be able to power you
know entire cities that sort of thing so
again the lesson here is with nuclear
power don't be terrified of the distant
problem if people being scared into
action rather than rationally acting and
choosing then then I would submit that
that's part of the problem don't scare
people into doing things allow them to
understand the facts as they are fully
completely but with nuclear power it
appears and especially in Australia we
don't have nuclear power we have huge
reserves of uranium no nuclear power
stations why not well because people
became terrified of nuclear energy they
acted and chose and made decisions
irrationally or the politics and
morality all went haywire on this and so
it went around the world as well and now
now the the Panic is not so much the
nuclear power the Panic is climate
change but why should we expect that the
outcome this time around from fomenting
fear and Terror will work any better
than it did with nuclear power I don't
think it will that's the lesson don't
create an electorate a populace and
young people terrified of Any Given
problems are soluble let's keep going
we'll skip another section and of course
what comes up quote terrorism like other
losses of life with malice a forethought
Brews up a different chemistry of fear
body counting data scientists are often
perplexed at the way that highly
publicized but low casualty killings can
lead to epical societal reactions the
worst terror attack in history by far
was 911 and it claimed three thousand
lives in most bad years the United State
suffers a few dozen terrorist deaths a
rounding era in the tally of homicides
and accidents the annual toll is lower
for example than the number of people
killed by lightning bee stings or
drowning in bathtubs yet 911 led to the
creation of a new federal department
massive surveillance of citizens and
hardening of public facilities and two
Wars which killed more than twice as
many Americans as the number who died in
2001 together with hundreds of thousands
of Iraqis and afghanis end quote
foreign
you read it you just go well that's
not the Pinnacle of rationality we are
right to be concerned and I wonder what
Sam Harris would say about something
like this you know his friend
um Stephen Pinker writing in these terms
that's all the wrong frame body count is
not the metric and again frequency is
not probability this is about knowledge
and bad ideas it is absolutely rightly
the concern of the United States and
others that after 9 11 and even before a
real genuine concern was could any of
these often state-sponsored terrorists
get hold of a nuclear weapon now we
don't need to hear about the fact that
states have holds of nuclear weapons
okay there are systems in place there
are Traditions there are worries about
these things but it's a real concern
if I terrorists of the kind who could do
something like 911 or blow up people on
the tube or just stab people in a park
or a cafe
if those people have access to nuclear
weapons and can get access to nuclear
weapons or even just a material used in
nuclear weapons make a so-called dirty
bomb
that is catastrophic that needs to be
guarded against it has nothing to do
with the number of people that are
killed each year and the number of
people killed each year can we consider
the explanation as to why that number is
small
is it because we're doing something
about it because of that infrastructure
that kind of was written about rather
Snidely there
this whole idea that the creation of a
new federal department massive
surveillance of citizens and hardening
of public facility now now I don't like
a massive surveillance of citizens or
two big Wars and and so on and so forth
but as for these systems being put in
place could they be a reason why the
frequency of these things is not far
worse why the terrorist attack hasn't
come because of being thwarted and we
now have taught a terrorist attacks in
In A Book Like This one would hope that
we would have some statistics the
frequency with which the terrorist
attacks have been thwarted how many
lives have been saved well Pinker
doesn't write about that
which I think is an important Mission
but there it is Terrorism it always
comes up in this this stuff and I
mentioned it
um in my last episode on probability
about risk and so on the academics love
and the journalists love chastising the
layperson on this point
saying things like don't you know how
rare it is you're more likely to get
killed by a falling ladder hit by
lightning something like that as if
ideas don't matter as if motivation
doesn't matter as if there's not a whole
bunch of people out there
that might not be capable of committing
a terrorist atrocity but actually
support it because there are people that
believe certain things
Sam Harris has talked about this you
know there are people who commit Terror
because of
the bad ideas that they hold and there
are people who just support Those who
commit Terror because of the bad ideas
that they hold and they're teaching
their children right now
about all the reasons why terrorism is
good and that's the issue it doesn't
have anything to do with probability and
frequency
what it has to do with is the content
and effects of bad ideas and so we
terrorism is a
is an existential threat this is one of
the ones that um I think we have to be
as concerned about if you're concerned
about climate change you should be as or
more concerned with terrorism because
it's immediate okay it's happening now
but of course this is unfortunately
politicized
skipping a significant amount well it's
a long chapter this one long chapter
I'll pick it up just where Pinker says
quote outrageous cannot become public
without media coverage it was in the
aftermath of the main explosion that the
term yellow journalism came into common
usage even when journalists don't whip
readers into a jingoistic lather in
temperate public reactions are a
built-in Hazard I believe journalists
have not given enough thought to the way
that media coverage can activate our
cognitive biases and distort our
understandings end quote now I've kind
of been saying this recently that public
intellectuals and scientists
at least online at times absolutely
resemble the journalists in terms of
their emotional reactions to stuff and
the way they conduct themselves rudely
and I've been on my hobby horse about
this these things these emotional
reactions distort our understanding as
much as anything that appears in the
media because on social media these
people are looked to as representatives
of intellectual culture and if they're
if they're carrying on hurling
expletives with one another well that's
an issue whenever you see a sports
person a footballer or whenever you hear
about a sports person or footballer
caught by police for a drunken fight in
a bar on some Friday night there's
absolute uproar in the media that this
person is supposed to be a role model to
youngsters
so Court should throw the books we're
told at such people for their poor
example but if Society has that attitude
what are the consequences for the public
intellectual who online enters into a
flame wall with their own followers
using expletives and generally bringing
Academia into disrepute are they not
Role Models as well they're not so
similarly chastised and this thing about
journalists well let me just read on the
Pinker goes on to write quote the Press
is an availability machine it serves up
anecdotes which feed our impression of
what's common in a way that is
guaranteed to mislead since news is what
happens not what does not happen the
denominator in the fraction
corresponding to the true probability of
an event all the opportunities for the
event to occur including those in which
it doesn't is invisible leaving us in
the dark about how prevalent something
really is end quote so and Pinker goes
on in this vein I mean it's somewhat
true it depends on how and to what
extent one consumes the news I suppose
yes there is an issue with the media
focusing on this and not that but I
think to Western society's credits we
are becoming more cynical about the news
like surveys are conducted and they now
routinely show that journalists in
general that you know especially from
CNN and Fox News and so on that are
among the least trusted entities and
institutions in society some might think
this is bad I think there's a good side
to this because it means that people are
more often error checking where they can
they're checking multiple sources now
they may be falling into other errors
and you know certainly some are prone to
falling into conspiracy theories but so
long as Society is not falling into
violent Anarchy and it's not it's not
going backwards at all so far as I can
tell if there is one step back this
there is still two steps forward and if
society's going in the direction as many
people bemoan in the direction of
populism well I'm happy about that the
opposite as I recently reflected on the
opposite of populism is elitism I'd
rather live under populism the reason
for that is that the Common Man the
layperson well has common sense and
still term they aren't systematically
making areas of the kind the experts
make and there is something to be said
for perhaps appreciating the fact you're
not an expert experts tend to act or
speak in such a way sometimes not all of
them there are some important exceptions
but experts can tend to speak in such a
way that if they're an expert in one
thing then suddenly they're an expert in
N different things where n has no upper
limit you know things like well I'm a
neurosurgeon and say they think to
themselves by comparison everything
compared to neurosurgery is easy so I
guess I'm an expert in chemistry and
physics and fixing cars as well well not
quite but you get what I'm saying and I
was going to mention journalists but let
me just I'll just read this I'll just
read this section so I'm skipping a fair
bit and Pinker then says quote a special
place in journalist hell is reserved for
the scribes who in 2021 during the
rollout of covet vaccines known to have
a 95 efficacy rate wrote stories on the
vaccinated people who came down with the
Disease by definition not news since it
was always certain there would be some
and guaranteed to scare thousands from
this life-saving treatment end quote
okay well that's you know it's true in a
superficial sense but the framing areas
I would say false it presumes the
journalists did know the truth and the
journalists know best but journalists
are average typical people they just do
journalism if the average person is
scared about some people who is who are
vaccinated getting infected why is the
journalists pardoned upon why is the
journalist immune from that error from
the era that the normal person is making
they're not
it seems to me that to many
intellectuals they hold journalists to
an unusually high standard they have too
high in expectation of the expertise of
the journalists I knew myself growing up
I wasn't even out of high school yet and
I realized that journalists knew little
about science because they made so many
errors so often in science and I
concluded even then well imagine all the
errors they're making in those areas
where I don't have an interest and don't
have much knowledge about if they can
write reports even today even today you
can pick up a newspaper or go online
read something by a journalist and it
could be titled does your food contain
chemicals you know clickbaity stuff like
that well if they can write stuff like
that what do you expect their knowledge
of vaccines and Immunology is really so
forget all this holding journalists to a
super high standard they are not and
cannot be expected to be experts
everywhere and immune from errors that
the average person isn't either now the
normative thing should be of course that
they research more before they write a
story and care more deeply about what
they're writing the consequences of what
they're writing and error correct along
the way but shouldn't we all know now
that so much of modern journalism is
there it exists
to sell stuff to sell advertising space
to get more eyes on stories that's what
it's there for it's a it's almost a form
of entertainment in places and so that's
up to the individual and in this case
with this vaccine story where the
journalists have apparently written
something misleading where does the real
responsibility lie does it lie with the
journalists for making the fallacious or
misleading medical claim or does it lie
with the reader who's apparently taking
medical advice from journalists over
their own doctor
surely that's an important issue our
Pinker goes on to write quotes
journalists should put lurid events in
context a killing the murder or a plane
crash or a shark attack should be
accompanied by the annual rate which
takes into account the denominator of
the probability not just the numerator
well end quote well perhaps but it still
isn't giving you a probability actually
it's giving you a frequency and that
might not be your probability of that
thing happening to you like does it work
the other way does it work for car
accidents car accidents are reported in
the media here in Australia relatively
frequently the last time I looked there
was something like 2.2 million Global
fatalities per year
is that a lot I don't know to me it
seems like a lot and Roads do tend to
worry me but then I don't drive because
I don't drive my the the likelihood of
me being involved in a car accident is
somewhat less than someone who's driving
to work every single day you know it's
my irrationality you know in part that I
I get more worried in a car I'd rather
be on an aircraft all day than even in a
car for a short trip maybe for other
reasons of course uh I'm imagining being
in business class at least and a good
meal and a window seat flying over the
Himalayas but
the fact is that providing frequencies
for all these bad events I mean for what
reason the the news is there to report
the news and even if it provides a
frequency that can give people a false
impression as well you know if you're
told I think I used this in my last in
my last episode on on probability
um you know if if in fact someone was
killed by lightning right and then the
news reports on this what Pinker wants
to also accompany that story is the
annual rate you know you know only five
people in Australia per year are killed
by lightning strikes so what are we
supposed to conclude from that having
read the story about someone who was
just killed by a lightning strike but
then we also read that well only five
people per year are killed by lightning
strikes you know and there's 20
something million people in Australia so
why worry so does that mean that you
know it's going to encourage people to
go wandering through thunderstorms
holding umbrellas on top of high heels
well you know so there are swings and
roundabouts on these things if we're to
talking about rationally considering
what a journalist should do unintended
consequences I think we call all that
stuff okay so we're at a section next
section is called conjunctive
disjunctive and conditional
probabilities and again I'm not going to
read most of this because in fact very
little really um this because this
section it deals with high school
mathematics he goes through some high
school mathematics here in Australia
this stuff about conjunctive disjunct
conditional probabilities is dealt with
in our year not year eight or year nine
the second and third years of high
school anyway the first thing is
conjunctive probability let's go through
it Pinky uses other examples I'll use
coin tosses and card cards drawing cards
because the numbers are easier to follow
and people are familiar with these
things I think they are anyway so the
first thing we have to do is we have to
assume the probability calculus holds
true so here's a conjunctive probability
what's the chance of flipping a coin and
getting it heads well to half but what's
the chance of flipping two heads in a
row well it's a half times a half it's a
head and a head now when you hear the
word and in probability often it
indicates a multiplication is going on
so a half for the first head and a half
for the second head half times a half is
a quarter that's the chance of throwing
two heads in a row now disjunctive is or
and or the operator or logical or and
probability or is a plus so if you've
got um what's the chance of throwing a
head or a tail well chance of throwing a
head is a half chance to throwing a
Tails a half add them together you get
one unsurprisingly
and this is what happens when things are
independent but there is such a thing as
as dependent events
if I say a standard deck of cards is 52
cards which it is what's the chance of
drawing the Ace of Spades well it's one
in 52.
what's the chance of drawing a black
card well it's one and two half of the
cards are black and half a white We're
ignoring jokers in this standard deck of
cards let's say now conjunctive events
you know a sequence of events what if
you draw two cards or what's the chance
of drawing a black card followed by
another black card
Well it can't be one and two times one
and two it's not like the coin and the
reason is that once if you're if you're
drawing a black card and not replacing
it this is the important thing you draw
out one black card and you don't replace
them what's the chance of drawing the
next Black Card well although for the
first card it absolutely is one and two
once you've removed that card once
you've removed the card then the deck
you've got left in front of you only has
51 cards in it so if you put the one
that you've just drawn aside consider
how many black cards are left well it's
not it's certainly not exactly half of
the deck anymore half of the original
deck was 26 cards but you removed one of
them and it was a black card so now
you're down to 25 black cards and 26 red
cards so the chance of drawing a black
card the second time around is 25 out of
51 because you've got 25 black cards and
the total number of cards is 25 plus 26.
so your chance has been reduced it's
slightly less than a half now now this
is where I want to go back to I want to
go back to earlier on and we're
discussing the book this chance of 25
out of 51 well that's slightly less than
a half but I think I said earlier on
didn't he that being close to a half is
a half I don't know what he'd say about
this
now I do of course he gets this the
chance of two black cards is first card
one and two second card 25 out of 51
multiply those together one over two
times 25 over 51 and you get 25 over
102. now the thing is if that was
interesting to you at all or you can go
right down the rabbit hole on this we
get into a whole area of mathematics
called permutations and combinations
it's something more broadly at
University called combinatorics which is
fun and simultaneously it's also a
nightmare I liked it but only after lots
of practice which was difficult but once
you get through it like lots of things
in mathematics it can kind of become fun
it's like a game here in Australia
um you can actually do some of this
stuff in high school we get to the
harder stuff in like year 11 and 12
which I taught for a while and well it's
just a lot to keep juggled in your head
at times the fun stuff was working out
things like how they determine Lottery
odds for example like if a lottery draw
has 40 numbers to select from and you
get to pick well you can't you have to
pick six numbers accurately in order to
win the lottery but let's say you are
allowed to pick up to eight you can pick
eight numbers what's the chance that out
of your eight numbers you'll get six
right out of the 40 that you can select
from well you can work it out using
permutations combinations and what about
is the chance any different if you pick
seven numbers not eight numbers or ten
numbers not eight numbers that kind of
thing so anyway the chapter goes on and
we encountered Donald Trump again before
we get to the end of the chapter well
let's just read the passage it says I'll
just quote it another howler in
calculating conjunctions had a cameo in
the bizarre attempt by Donald Trump and
his supporters to overturn the results
of the 2020 presidential election based
on baseless claims of voter fraud end
quote hmm well I don't know was it all
baseless I don't know I don't know
enough about the situation but I I think
I thought most people right and left
agreed rightly or wrongly that the
number of votes involved in this thing
was insufficient ultimately speaking to
change the outcome of the election but
as for baseless claims of voter fraud
look again I don't know but I can say
this I think broadly in the west our
systems are robust but they're not
perfect here in Australia we have
something called the aec the Australian
electoral commission which I was
surprised to learn the United States it
actually lacks anything like this the
USA has this system where each state or
is a district or something some local
Authority anyway takes care of federal
voting and how the Voting is actually
count how the votes are counted so there
are different rules in different
jurisdictions over there in the United
States that seems ripe for things going
wrong but here in Australia we have this
centralized agency which is in theory
stands apart from the government okay so
that's fraught with other problems but
it seems to work this one government
agency which I don't I don't mind the
government taking care of that if the
government's going to exist why not have
an agency that just takes care of the
the counting because also in this system
this system of counting I think this
happens around the world as well there
are also independent observers citizens
can elect to be observers or the parties
can nominate people who work for the
party to go and observe and in fact I've
done that once and truth be told I did
it for the greens the greens party I
watched the aec the Australian
intellectual commission actually count
the votes to see that it was all above
board and you have people from all the
different parties there and so I've done
this observing this observing of
accounting back when I was younger you
know much younger more ignorant less
cynical anyway however I think in every
election and my understanding is in
every election there are some attempts
at fraud at fraud in the elections and I
think there's some non-zero number every
single year every single election that
you have that are successful I think
it's rare that it would sway the
election but it happened so I don't
think these things are baseless I mean
here in Australia the problem is like
with the USA postal voting who is
posting those votes and why once again
if you get fixated on Trump as you know
he crops up again and again in this book
anyway the Trump stuff goes on for a few
more pages I'm not going to read through
it Pinker explains some more things in
this chapter about the gamblers fallacy
all quite reasonable no run of luck the
gambler's fallacy ever makes it more
likely the luck will continue or not
continue that's the inverse gambler's
fallacy I suppose and we end on
conditional probability that's where I'm
going to end it today on conditional
probability I'll Linger on this because
it will be important for Bayesian
reasoning so let's read this section
quote Pinker rights finally we get to
conditional probability the probability
of a given B written as and I'll put it
up on the screen it's written as
probability of a conditional on b a
conditional probability is conceptually
simple it's just the probability of the
then in an if then it's also
arithmetically simple it's just the
probability of A and B divided by the
probability of B end quote just keep
that in mind it's just the probability
of A and B divided by the probability of
B let's keep going nonetheless it's the
source of endless confusions blunders
and paradoxes and reasoning about
probability starting with the hapless
fellow and the XK CD cartoon on the
following page I'll put that on the
screen here's our allies in confusing
the simple probability your base rate of
lightning deaths the probability of
being struck by lightning with the
conditional probability of a lightning
death given that one is outside during
an electrical storm probably struck by
lightning outside in storm so the
picture there shows we see a lightning
crack but the people didn't get hit by
lightning and one of them saying whoa we
should get inside and the other one's
saying it's okay lightning only kills
about 45 Americans a year so the chance
of dying are only one in seven million
let's go on which was my point earlier
okay let's keep on reading quote though
the arithmetic of the conditional
probability is simple it's unintuitive
until we make it concrete and
visualizable and I'm not going to go
through the visualization instead I'm
going to skip to a specific example
which is what pinky uses quote he says
the Grays have two children the Elder is
a girl knowing this what is the
probability that both are girls let's
translate the question into a
conditional probability namely the
probability that the first is a girl and
the second is a girl given the first is
a girl or in fancy notation probability
first equals girl and second equals goal
on the condition of the first equals a
girl the formula tells us to divide the
conjunction which we can calculate to be
0.25 in other words a half times a half
by the simple probability for the second
child 0.5 and we get 0.5 okay 0.25
divided by 0.5 is 0.5 or thinking
classically and concretely girl girl
divided by the possibility of girl girl
and girl boy equals one half and then
skipping a little and he goes on to have
another example he says consider the
whites yet another two-child family at
least one of them is a girl one is the
probability that both are girls namely
the conditional probability of two girls
given at least one girl and he writes so
few people get the answer right that
statisticians call it the boy or girl
Paradox people tend to say 0.5 but the
correct answer is 0.33 in this case nice
concrete thinking can lead to the wrong
answer people visualize an elder girl
realize she could have either a younger
sister or a younger brother and figure
that the sister is one possibility out
of these two they forget that there's
another way of having at least one goal
she could be the younger of the two
enumerating the possibilities properly
we get the possibility of girl girl
divided by girl girl plus girl boy plus
boy girl I'll put this on the screen
which equals one-third because using the
formula we divide 0.25 by 0.75 and the
reason why we have that denominator is
because they're the possibilities of at
least one girl so you've got to add them
all together
now this is another it's it's again in
what high school mathematics is a
combination it's part of permutations
and combinations in fact what we're what
we're going to end on is um the very
last section is called prior it's called
prior and post-hoc probabilities but as
we'll see I don't think this is really
about probabilities at all well
not much of the chapter is
he he later calls it um a priorian a
posteriori judgments which I think is
probably closer to the mark the
confusion here what he's talking about
is sometimes called the Texas
Sharpshooter fallacy after the Marksman
who fires a bullet into the side of a
barn and then Paints the bullseye around
the hole so we know about this phenomena
it then goes on to right quote if you
take note of the predictions by a
psychic that are borne out by events but
don't divide the total number of
predictions correct and incorrect you
can get any probability you want as
Francis Bacon noted in 1620 such as the
way of all superstitions whether in
astrology dreams Omens or Divine
judgments
or financial markets an unscrupulous
investment advisor with a hundred
thousand person mailing list sends a
newsletter to half the list predicting
the market will rise and aversion to the
other half predicting it will fall at
the end of every quarter he discards the
names of the people to whom he sent the
wrong prediction and repeats the process
with the remainder after two years he
signs up the
1562 recipients who are amazed at his
track record of predicting the market
eight quarters in a row though this scam
is illegal if carried out knowingly when
it's carried out naively it's the
lifeblood of the finance industry
Traders are lightning quick at snapping
up Bargains so very few stock Pickers
can outperform a Mindless basket of
Securities one exception was Bill Miller
anointed by CNN money in 2006 as the
greatest money manager of our time for
beating the S P 500 stock market index
15 years in a row how impressive is that
one might think that if a manager is
equally likely to outperform or
underperform the index in any year the
odds of that happening by chance to just
one in thirty two thousand seven hundred
and sixty eight or two to the power
fifteen but Miller was singled out after
his amazing streak had unfolded as the
physicist Len melodno pointed out in the
drunkard's walk how Randomness rules our
lives the country has more than 6 000
fund managers and modern mutual funds
have been around for about 40 years so
the chance that some fund manager had a
15-year winning streak sometime over
those 40 years is not at all unlikely
it's three and four that's a great
little story I like that one skipping a
bit and then Pinker writes about an
interesting coincidence you're right
quote when I was a child what we now
call Memes was circulated in comic books
and popular magazines one that made the
rounds was a list of incredible
similarities between Abraham Lincoln and
John F Kennedy Honest Abe and JFK were
both elected to congress in 46 and to
the presidency in 60. both were shot in
the head in the presence of their wives
on a Friday Lincoln had a secretary
named Kennedy Kennedy had a secretary
named Lincoln both were succeeded by
Johnsons who were born in 08 their
assassins were both born in 39 and had
three names which add up to 15 letters
John Wilkes Booth ran from a theater and
was caught in a warehouse Lee Harvey
Oswald ran from a warehouse was caught
in a theater
what do these Eerie parallels tell us
with all due respect to Dr Young
absolutely nothing other than that
coincidence has happened more often than
our statistically untuted Minds
appreciate not to mention the fact that
when spooky coincidences are noticed
they tend to get embellished Lincoln
didn't have a secretary named Kennedy
while pesky non-coincidences like the
different days months and years of their
birth and death are ignored skipping a
little Pinker goes on to right one kind
of post-hoc probability illusion is so
common that it has its own name the
cluster illusion we're good at spotting
tightly packed collections of things or
events because they are often part of a
single happening a barking dog that
won't shut up a weather system that
drenches the city for several days a
burglar on a spree who robs several
stores in a block but not all clusters
have a root cause indeed most of them
don't
end quote yeah I'll just mention one
here in Australia
a few years ago in Queensland in a place
called tuong years ago there was a
cancer cluster at an ABC building ABC is
an Australian Broadcasting Corporation
so the equivalent of the BBC and lots of
people got I think 15 ultimately in this
rather small building 15 of the women
there developed breast cancer
given the prevalence of cancer however
we sometimes you know you know big
nation like Australia we sometimes have
to expect that at least in one building
somewhere there'll be a cluster there'll
be a lot of people just there by chance
for independent reasons
unrelated to the building altogether it
could be related to the building but
um you know statisticians were the first
ones to sort of say well this should be
expected once in a while they still
investigated but I think that they
ultimately didn't find anything wrong
with the building it wasn't like the
building was causing
um the cancer cluster Pinker uses
another interesting cluster this is sort
of versky and Kahneman and Mathematics
teachers around the world use this all
the time which is can you tell the
difference between a random series of
coin flips and a non-random series of
coin flips and so the experiment that's
done and I might have talked about this
at some point during topcast anyway the
experiment that's done by Math teachers
is when kids are learning this stuff for
the first time you give one kid a coin
you tell them to go outside the room
with his friend and to flip the coin and
record whether it comes heads or tails
okay so that's one situation and then
you take another kid and a friend and
you send them outside and you get them
to write down a made-up series of random
heads and tails so heads Tails heads
Tails heads tails and then you get the
kids to come back in and to swap the
pieces of paper you can in fact have the
whole class to do this and as the
teacher you can then pick which ones are
made up and which ones are actually the
result of actual coin tosses it's very
easy to do and how do you do it what's
the solution to the magic trick well the
solution to the magic trick is the real
coin tosses you know if you do enough of
them usually 100 is what you say to the
kid to to a hundred coin tosses what
will happen is that you get these long
strings of tails you know it's you know
five six seven in a row of tails that
will happen over the course of a hundred
but the person who's making up the heads
and tails if they don't know anything
else they won't do long strings they'll
do head tail head head tail tail tail
head head tail you know that sort of
thing so it's obviously a fabrication so
you can pick the fabricated one from the
genuinely random one because the
genuinely random one has these long
strings of coincidences yeah so Pinker
mentions that as well all right I'm
going to end it on that today because
we've been talking for a long time but
we're basically at the end of the
chapter in why
we've got misuses of statistics and
hence we've got misuses of probability
and well you just rarely need the
probability it seems it seems to be
becoming more and more obvious as I like
to say if you want to know the future
well tough luck you don't know the
future that's that's the first thing to
say if you have a good explanation well
then it will tell you what will happen
and it might tell you why you can't know
the future but absent any of that you
simply don't know now if you want to
know how worried you should be because
well the asteroids are rare but cancer
is not fair enough take steps don't
smoke smoking causes cancer it doesn't
matter what the frequency is smoking
causes cancer we know that but you
personally cannot do anything about the
asteroid except maybe send a donation to
NASA's project which detects them
so
go to my last episode about risk for
worrying about all that stuff but I
would just say live your life and enjoy
the fact that tomorrow is inherently
unpredictable because it might just be
your lucky day
until next time bye-bye
[Music]
foreign